Last week, I traveled to Budapest for a weekend getaway. 

I got up, took a shower, had a coffee, grabbed my things, took the train, went through airport security, found my gate, boarded the plane, watched an episode of Black Mirror, got out of the plane, left the airport, and went on to my day of sight seeing.

Without services, none of this would have been possible.

The water I used for showering reaches me through infrastructure provided by the government, which I pay for in taxes and monthly payments. The coffee beans I used for my coffee were delivered to me a few days prior, traveling through Amazon's vast logistics infrastructure after my request submitted through an app on my phone. Public transit, again, is a transportation service funded by the government and my monthly payments as a transit user. Airport security is necessary service that builds trust between me and airlines, and eventually the states allowing me to enter them without screening me specifically. Airlines are service providers that allow me to travel practically anywhere on this planet in less than a day. When I entered the Budapest airport, the Hungarian government simply allowed me in — not because they trust me, but because they trust the service that issued my passport. 

As citizens, users, and human beings in this day and age, we have become dependent on services. They allow us to have roofs over our heads, meet basic sanitary needs, be financially flexible, and provide us with the goods we need to biologically survive and procreate. Through society and monetary exchange, humanity has learned to exchange not only goods, but also efforts and experiences. We exchange value for value — money for affordances that allow us to depend on a third party to perform something we need.

In the late 20th century, digitalization began. And with it, services have moved on to their digital habitat — which allowed them to scale to incredible levels. 400 hours of video are uploaded to YouTube every single minute[@youtubeHours]. In 2011, global payments networks processed 74 Billion transactions[@transactions]. Social media users post 95 million individual images and videos on Instagram each day[@instagram]. In the last official statement on the matter, search-giant Google reported "_more than a billion searches per day_"[@searches], or 11574 searches _per second_. As this number was reported in 2010, it is only logical to assume today's numbers are even more impressive.

Each of these services are relatively simple on the surface. At the end of the day, they all provide you with a specific outcome for which you pay for in some way or the other. You, as a user, receive the outcome. And for it, the service receives something in return — something that, besides making a profit, it can use to uphold the vast infrastructure needed to provide its users desired outcomes.

Below the surface, every single one of these services starts to look a bit less simple. Service meshes of overwhelming complexity perform in itself incredible feats to provide parts of what is needed to provide that desired outcome. At this point, both the user and service are machines. Netflix, a video streaming service, hosts its video library on Amazon servers, using Amazon Web Services[@netflixAws]. Amazon offers this service to essentially lease its global infrastructure to third parties that want to offer digital experiences on their own. Netflix itself is entirely dependent on such a service, because building the kind of incredible network, with hundreds of data centers around the world and intricate mechanisms to intelligently balance load across the planet, is not its competence as a business entity. Netflix streams video — they don't host the videos themselves. Similarly, many digital experiences rely on tens to hundreds third party "sub-processors" — services that power things from marketing and data analysis to authentication and fraud detection (e.g. 56% of public websites use Google Analytics[@GoogleAnalytics]). 

This thesis aims to distill a framework for modeling digital service concepts by breaking down fundamental mechanisms into "atomic functionality", to then build up a multi-layered model that can be applied to individual services as well as multi-service relationship patterns. We will study paradigms from the world of Software Engineering and User Experience Design to base our model upon, attempting to deliver a coherent concept that can be used to design, define, analyze and optimize digital services. 

The desired outcome is that you as the reader adopt a modular way of thinking that allows you to understand and oversee the development of digital services across different fields.